                                        Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
                                        Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

                                               ScienceDirect
                                               ScienceDirect
                                         Procedia
                                      Available   Computer
                                                online     Science 00 (2021) 000–000
                                                       at www.sciencedirect.com
                                           Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000
                                                                                                                 www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
                                                                                                                 www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
                                                  ScienceDirect
                                          Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989



     CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN -
     CENTERIS
 International   - International
               Conference        Conference
                           on Project       on ENTERprise
                                      MANagement   / HCist -Information
                                                             InternationalSystems / ProjMAN
                                                                           Conference        -
                                                                                       on Health
 International Conference  on Project MANagement   / HCist - International
                  and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2021Conference  on Health
                  and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2021

                      Risks
                      Risks of
                            of Data
                               Data Science
                                    Science Projects
                                            Projects -- A
                                                        A Delphi
                                                          Delphi Study
                                                                 Study
                                             Cristina Varela*, Luísa Domingues
                                             Cristina Varela*, Luísa Domingues
                                     Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), ISTAR, Lisboa, Portugal
                                     Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), ISTAR, Lisboa, Portugal


Abstract
Abstract
Risk is one of the most crucial components of a project. Its proper evaluation and treatment increase the chances of a project's
Risk  is one
success.  Thisofarticle
                 the most   crucial
                        presents thecomponents
                                      risks in DataofScience
                                                      a project. Its proper
                                                              projects,      evaluation
                                                                        assessed throughand   treatment
                                                                                           a study      increase
                                                                                                   conducted  withthethechances
                                                                                                                          Delphi of  a project's
                                                                                                                                 technique,  to
success. This article presents the risks in Data Science projects, assessed through a study conducted with the Delphi technique, to
answer the question, "What are the risks of Data Science projects". The study allowed the identification of specific risks related to
answer the question, "What are the risks of Data Science projects". The study allowed the identification of specific risks related to
data science projects, however it was possible to verify that over a half of the most mentioned risks are similar to other types of IT
data science
projects. Thisprojects,  howeverthe
                paper describes    it was  possible
                                       research fromto expert
                                                       verify selection,
                                                              that over arisk
                                                                          halfidentification
                                                                               of the most mentioned   risks
                                                                                             and analysis,   arethe
                                                                                                           and    similar  to other types of IT
                                                                                                                    first conclusions.
projects. This paper describes the research from expert selection, risk identification and analysis, and the first conclusions.
©
© 2021
   2021 The
         The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This
This is
     is an
        an open
           open access
                 access article
                         article under
                                  under the
                                          the CC
                                               CC BY-NC-ND
                                                  BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
This is an open
Peer-review
Peer-review     access
              under
              under     article underof
                     responsibility
                     responsibility      thethe
                                        of    CCscientific
                                             the  BY-NC-ND
                                                 scientific    license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
                                                            committee
                                                            committee    of the
                                                                        of   the CENTERIS
                                                                                 CENTERIS -–International
                                                                                                  International Conference on ENTERprise
Peer-review
Information   under
              Systemsresponsibility
                        /  ProjMAN     of
                                        -   the scientificConference
                                           International    committee onof Project
                                                                            the CENTERIS
                                                                                    MANagement - International
                                                                                                      / HCist   - Conference  onConference
                                                                                                                  International  ENTERpriseon
Information Systems / ProjMAN - International Conference on Project             MANagement      / HCist  - International Conference on Health
Information
Health  and  Systems
             Social   / ProjMAN
                    Care             - International
                           Information     Systems     Conference
                                                      and          on Project
                                                          Technologies   2021   MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health
and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies 2021
and Social Data
Keywords:   CareScience,
                 Information
                          projectSystems    and Technologies
                                  sucess, project              2021risk assessment, Delphi study
                                                  risk management,
Keywords: Data Science, project sucess, project risk management, risk assessment, Delphi study


1. Introdução
1. Introdução
   It is already a consensus that the data are natural resources of the new industrial revolution [1]. The need for using
   It is already a consensus that the data are natural resources of the new industrial revolution [1]. The need for using
data to transform a business [2] has never been more urgent and thousands of companies have become overwhelmed
data to transform a business [2] has never been more urgent and thousands of companies have become overwhelmed
with data, due to the amount of it and its potential to influence business growth. Data Science (DS) has become an
with data, due to the amount of it and its potential to influence business growth. Data Science (DS) has become an
indispensable ally for the development of society. The collection, analysis, and storage of data have allowed companies
indispensable ally for the development of society. The collection, analysis, and storage of data have allowed companies
to understand and improve their business.
to understand and improve their business.


 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +0-000-000-0000 ; fax: +0-000-000-0000 .
 * E-mail
   Corresponding
          address:author. Tel.: +0-000-000-0000 ; fax: +0-000-000-0000 .
                   acava1@iscte-iul.pt
   E-mail address: acava1@iscte-iul.pt
1877-0509 © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
1877-0509   © 2021
This is an open      Thearticle
                 access  Authors.  Published
                                under         by Elsevier B.V.
                                      the CC BY-NC-ND     license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
This is an open
Peer-review      access
              under     article under
                    responsibility of the CC BY-NC-ND
                                      the scientific      license
                                                     committee     (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
                                                               of the CENTERIS - International Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems /
Peer-review   under responsibility of the scientific committee of
ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist  the CENTERIS      - International
                                                                           - International          Conference
                                                                                           Conference          onand
                                                                                                       on Health  ENTERprise
                                                                                                                     Social CareInformation
                                                                                                                                  InformationSystems
                                                                                                                                              Systems/
ProjMAN    - International
and Technologies   2021 Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health and Social Care Information Systems
and Technologies 2021
1877-0509 © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the CENTERIS –International Conference on ENTERprise Information
Systems / ProjMAN - International Conference on Project MANagement / HCist - International Conference on Health and Social Care
Information Systems and Technologies 2021
10.1016/j.procs.2021.12.100
                                        Cristina Varela et al. / Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989           983
2                          Cristina Varela, Luísa Domingues/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000

   Though all this profit, 85% of Data Science projects fail [3]. Literature of this industry presents some common-
sense type reasons: inadequate data [4] technology for its own sake instead of drivers of profits and key performance
indicators (KPI) [5] poor communication, insufficient executive support [5] over-complicating, and limited focus on
the real problem [6]. In effect, it is estimated that around 90% of available digital data is not being adequately used
[1]. And the question every project manager wants the answer is: “how can my project be in the 15% of success rate?”.
Since there is a large number of events that can lead projects to fail, how can a company prevents and deals correctly
with all of them?
    The first thought or step in risk management is the identification of the risks to be controlled to assure the project’s
success. The identification of the risks factors also plays an important role in this process [7]. Throughout the years,
several lists of risk factors have been published in the literature, but there is a lack of literature information about Data
Science projects risks. This paper aims to report the result of a study conducted with Delphi procedures, to identify
the risks of Data science projects and their drivers, in Portugal.
   A Delphi approach seemed to be suitable for this investigation since the information would be consensually sourced
by the Data Science specialists, who have been facing those risks in past and present experiences. This Delphi study
aimed to answer the questions:
   •      What are the risks of Data Science projects in Portugal?
   •      How often do they appear and how it impacts the project?
   •      How normally the risks are assessed and managed?
   •      Which risks and risks factors are more common for each area of Data Science?
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, it is described the background and motivation for the
research. Second, it is presented the research methodology used to conduct the study. Third, it is presented the
considerable findings of the study by reporting the list of Portuguese Data Science projects risks and discussing the
results. Finally, it is presented the conclusions that can be taken from this research, and discussed the limitations of
the study and the challenges faced, considering the potential for future work.

2. Background

   The growth in the use of data science is driven by the emergence of Big Data and social media, the speedup in
computing power, the massive reduction in the cost of computer memory, and the development of more powerful
methods for data analysis and modeling, such as deep learning [8]. Manheim and Kaplan support the idea of
technological improvement but also stated that the advances in the data science field brings not just a new age in
computing, but also present new dangers to social values and constitutional rights [9]. Those risks are well known as
a threat to privacy, social media algorithms, and the Internet of Things. Towards technological achievements society
started to see a promised future in human well-being. But those improvements did not come without side effects. The
internet gave rise to social media, whose devaluation of privacy has been profound [9]. Factors such as time, money,
and unrealistic expectations, among many others, are able to sabotage a promising project if it is not properly managed
[10]. In order to get better use of available data, taking into consideration the complexity involved in working with an
extensive quantity of data, as well as the difficulties that organizations may face in managing and control them,
managers should not underestimate the positive and negative effects that need to be taken into account in the
exploitation of data [11]. So, what is Data Science?
   Data Science encompasses a set of principles, problem definitions, algorithms, and processes for extracting non-
obvious and useful patterns from large data sets [8]. It can also be described as the “art and science of acquiring
knowledge through data” [12]. Data science is all about how the data is taken, processed, and used to acquire insights
and knowledge [2]. This further helps the organization to make and improve decisions, predict the future, understand
the past and/or present and create new business opportunities. Understanding Data Science begins with three basic
areas: hacking skills, math and statistics knowledge, and substantive expertise [12].

2.1. Risks of Data Science Projects

   Risk is described as an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on a project
objective [13]. Data Science involves many different areas, from Big Data, Data Mining, Artificial Intelligence, Deep
984                                      Cristina Varela et al. / Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989
                              Cristina Varela, Luísa Domingues/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000                  3

Learning, Machine Learning, Data Analytics, Business Intelligence, and everything that involves extracting
knowledge from data [2]. Data sets with many possible input variables bring essentially high risk [14]. As with any
business initiative, a project of Big Data, Data Mining, or Data Analytics involves a lot of risks. At some point when
the volume, variety, and velocity of the data are increased, the current techniques and technologies may not be able to
handle storage and processing of the data [15] and it also brings issues regarding the cost of it and the security
providence [11]. Risks as data privacy and confidentiality, poor analyses, lack of skilled expertise to deal with business
and technologies [1], [16], have also been identified.
    Hasan et al [17], stated that some organizations tend to adopt Business Intelligence (BI) with ambiguous objectives,
allied with poor business and data management, limited funding and expertise, leading to a great failure. Artificial
Intelligence (AI) has also encountered numerous advantages to the technological processes, but its risks can lead to
major failures that can bring significant challenges for organizations. From reputational damage and revenue losses to
the regulatory backlash, criminal investigation, and diminished public trust [18]. Risks factors as lack of labeled data,
technology troubles, security snags, models misbehaving, human-machine interactions issues, lack of transparency
and interpretability and so many others have been identified by many studies [19], [18], [20].
    Considering all these risks, the following sections show the research methodology that has been used to investigate
the risks of Data Science projects, their factors, frequency, and impacts in the Portuguese industry.

3. Research Method

   To reach the information needed regarding Portuguese DS projects, it was conducted a Delphi study. The purpose
of the Delphi study is to develop a reliable list of risks of Data Science projects in Portugal and its factors, and
determine which of those risks are more important and impactful. This study also aims to get information about the
response strategies and tools used to manage those threats and challenges with an acceptable level of consensus.

3.1. The panelist composition

    The input source chosen for the study is Portuguese professionals with experience in Data Science projects.
 Since Data Science has diverse fields of practice and approach, a representative sample of different backgrounds
 was selected. According to Osborne et al. [21], commonly, the minimum number for a Delphi panel is 10 with a
 reduction in error and improved reliability with increased group size. [22], [23], [24], [25] revealed that studies
 tend to utilize between 10 and 30 specialist participants. The definition of the panelists/experts for the study was
 inspired by [25] steps proposed structure, as shown in table 1.

                 Table 1. Procedure for selecting panelists – Source: [25]
                 Steps                                                 Actions
                 Step 1: Prepare KRNW                                  Identify relevant skills: practitioners
                 Step 2: Populate KRNW with names                      Write in names of individuals in relevant skills
                 Step 3: Rank expert                                   Categorize experts according to appropriate list ->
                                                                       Rank experts within each list based on their
                                                                       qualification
                 Step 4: Invite experts                                Invite experts in the order of their ranking to
                                                                       participate in the study -> target size 10 - 20

       * KRNW - Knowledge Resource Nomination Worksheet

   The specialist acknowledgment was provided, by LinkedIn searches. To achieve diversity in respondents, a list of
specialists with different backgrounds in Data Science fields were chosen as the target populations for selecting the
panelists. To find the wanted professionals it was applied the following search keywords were: “Data scientist” - “Data
science project manager” – “Data science specialist/ expert “- “Big Data specialist/expert” – “Machine learning
specialist” – “Data science Team manager” – “Data analyst specialist/ expert” – “Data mining specialist/ expert” –
“Artificial Intelligence specialist/ expert” – “Data engineer”.
                                        Cristina Varela et al. / Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989           985
4                          Cristina Varela, Luísa Domingues/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000

   For each Data Science field, it was listed the largest number as possible into the appropriate categories. In the
ranking step, it was compared the qualifications of those on the large list of specialists and rank them in priority for
the invitation to the study. First, it was created the three sub-lists: The specialists, the seniors (people with a career in
Data Science rounding 4 years and above, but not identified as a specialist), and the consultants (people with some
years of experience in Data Science). The main focus of this study was the participation of the specialists and seniors
based on their qualifications and years of experience. Based on the rankings, was sent 48 invitations for the study.
Each person on the list was contacted and explained the subject of the study and the procedures required for it,
including the commitment required, the schedule, and privacy terms. From the list, 16 accepted to take part in the
study, 4 declined for personal/professional reasons and 28 did not respond to the invitation, which was reinforced
twice. With 16 confirmed participants, it was created the panel for the first round.
   The study was planned to be conducted in three stages to get a consensus. Brooks in [26] identified consensus as ‘a
gathering of individual evaluations around a median response, with minimal divergence’. A general guideline is to
conduct 3 rounds, before panel fatigue becomes an issue [25] and so that a strong consensus can be obtained, when
Kendall's coefficient of concordance reach W>= 0.7 [22].

3.2. The Data collection

   In the first round of this process, the 16 specialists/experts received a message on LinkedIn with the link to the
questionnaire. In the introduction of the questionnaire, there was a text that oriented them to the purpose of the round
and the completion of the questionnaire. The questionnaire was structured with a list of 41 risks of Data Science
projects (grouped by category), identified during the literature review. The specialist role was to validate the risks that
he/she has already identified in a Data Science project or that is considered relevant. It was also requested that panellists
could present other risks by categorising them. The main goal of the first round was to undertake a brainstorming
round to identify risk. The list was categorized following PMI [13] Risk Breakdown Structure. The risks categories
selected were: Functional scope - Project management - Operation management – Technological – Quality - Resource
- Surrounding environments – Legal – Communication – Organizational – others.
   The second round involved classifying all the risks identified in the first round by probability, impact, outcome,
and level of impact. The questionnaire was structured in an excel workbook comprising: an introduction sheet, a
business area identification sheet, and a classification sheet, where the risks were listed.
   For this round, it was sent more than 14 invitations (4 of them were the reinforcement of the first-round invitation),
6 specialists accepted the invitation, one declined and the 7 did not respond. From the first group (16 specialists), just
7 of them participated in the second round, and from the new set, just 4 participated. Therefore the second round had
11 participations. Based on 60 risks (41 risks from the first round plus the 19 suggested by the experts), organized by
category and the areas in which the participant has professional experiences, the goal was to classify those risks by
probability, impact, outcome, and level of impact. The probability and impact level options were: Very Low (0% –
10%) – Low (11% - 30%) – Medium (31% - 50%) – High (51% - 70%) - Very High (71% - 99%). The impact type
options were: Integrity / Credibility - Availability (service, infrastructure, human...) – Security (public, infrastructure,
business...) - Quality of Service – Cost - Productivity / Motivation - Legal process. Finally, the outcome options were:
Opportunity or Threat.

3.3. Findings

   In the first round, within the 41 listed risks and 16 participations, some risks got a remarkable identification rate
compared to the others. About 69% of the experts identified risks such as “starting the project with wrong questions”,
“project scope poorly outlined with the client”, and “lack of concern about data quality”. 62% identified risks such as
“misinterpretation of requirements”, “lack of information in the data”, “poor analysis/validation of model
inputs/outputs”, “lack of talent (lack of knowledge and training in data intelligence)”, “violation of data privacy”,
“communication problems”, and “lack of transparency”. Such risks are mostly of a functional and project management
nature. Other risks, related to “poor time estimation”, “lack of specialized staff in the team”, “use of wrong methods
in data collection and processing”, “model instability” and “loss of data confidentiality” were also highly identified,
reaching an identification rate of 50% among the experts. While behaviors related to 2negligence towards data
986                                         Cristina Varela et al. / Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989
                                 Cristina Varela, Luísa Domingues/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000                                5

security” were often identified (44% identification rate), risks related to “lack of security awareness”, “cyber-attacks”
and “theft or loss of information” were rarely pointed out, reaching only a 10% identification rate. Implying that
companies and employees are aware of security measures but they are not always applied, and this neglect of security
may explain the high identification rate of data privacy breaches and loss of confidentiality of data (almost 70%).
Risks related to political, economic and social issues were rarely pointed out (about 18% of the experts identified
them).
   However, the dynamics defined for this first round also allowed the experts to suggest factors and risks considered
relevant and that were not presented in the list initially presented, thus conditioning the brainstorming. Within the
structured categories, there were suggestions in almost all them. They are:
   • Functional scope risks (“poor management of customer expectations” and “unclear or lack of documentation
        (technical and functional)”),
   • Project management risks (“lack of clarity about which information sources to use”, “poor management of the
        team skills and high team volatility”),
   • Operational management risks (“concentrating on model performance rather than usability” and “lack of
        knowledge of data segmentation practices”)
   • Quality risks (“limited data processor capacity (memory, processor)”, “lack of a quality management system
        on input data (lack of validation on input formatting)” and “poor quality testing by of client”)
   • Communication risks (“customer unavailability to meet”, “lack of alignment between project manager, team
        and client” and “lack of model explanation for a non-technical language”)
   • Technological risks (“lack of clarity about the expected growth/Upgrade of the source systems”, “poor
        software choice/selection”, “systems incompatibility (migration problems)” and “introduction with a new
        technology”)
   • Organizational risks (“lack of information system structure support”).
   The main goal of the first round was to develop a list of factors that could drive a range of diverse and different
risks. Undertaken this list and 11 participations, the second round results analysis, revealed that most of the risks were
classified as threats. The most identified risk categories were “Project functional scope”, “Communication” and
“Project Management”, and the most identified areas of impact were on “Project scope”, “Cost”, “Time” and “Service
quality”. Considering that the fields were different it was expected that some risks would occur more frequently in
some fields than in others. Based on this assumption, it was created the top 25 most frequent risks in every single DS
field taken in analysis. Since some risks were in a similar context the list was reconfigured to better describe each risk
and the scenarios it could occur. It was considered to be frequent, those risks with the probability level classification
of “Medium” to “Very high”. Table 2, represents the 25 most identified risks, considered frequent in DS projects.

      Table 2. Top 25 most identified risks as “frequent” in the second round
      Risks                             Description
      Project scope poorly defined      It refers to scenarios where the project is started with the wrong questions/focus. Often, people
                                        focus more on how interesting a project is and not on how much money/time it will save the
                                        company. This can sometimes cause the project questions and answers to be wrongly planned
      Lack of documentation             It relates to scenarios where there is a scarcity of (technical / functional) documentation and its
                                        lack of clarity, when it exists. For it is necessary that there is an explanation of how the models
                                        work and how the conclusion was reached
      Lack of transparency and          Refers to scenarios in which there are communication problems. For example, lack of
      understanding of the project      alignment of ideas between the project manager, team and client, lack of interest or critical
      (communication problems)          sense on project issues, misinterpretation of requirements or refusal to ask for help in time
      Little analysis/validation of     Refers to scenarios where there is a lack of verification of the quality and format of data (input
      model inputs and outputs          and output) by the customer or the team responsible for the project
      Negligence in risk planning       Refers to the lack of emphasis given to planning and identifying possible risks to the project
      Poorly defined estimates          Refers to underestimated deadlines that are difficult to meet
      Data system failures              Refers to scenarios related to migration problems, system incompatibility or data growth not
                                        assumed by the target system
                                          Cristina Varela et al. / Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989                             987
6                             Cristina Varela, Luísa Domingues/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000

      Complex data - faulty data       Relates to scenarios where there is little margin for manipulation, complex data label
      Lack of awareness about          Refers to the scenarios in which project planning and development is not carried out aiming at
      future changes                   the constant changes and needs of the market
      Poor skills management in the    Refers to scenarios in which team members are responsible for tasks outside their area of
      team                             expertise, or when the inputs of some members are not taken into consideration
      Budget underestimation           Refers to the scenarios in which the budget planned for the project, is not able to meet the
                                       project's requirements
      Inability to strengthen budget   Refers to the impossibility of increasing the project's financial resources
      Negligence towards data          It relates to the lack of training and awareness of employees about data security and digital
      security                         vulnerability security and digital vulnerability
      Human operational errors in      Refers to errors made by the project team during the development of the project (e.g: use of
      project development              improper methods of data processing and analysis)
      Conflict of objectives among     Refers to the scenario where project stakeholders have diverging opinions and goals
      stakeholders
      Very complex models              It is related to the scenarios where there is difficulty in the usability of the models and lack of
                                       explanation of them in a non-technical language. Or when it becomes difficult for whoever
                                       continues with the maintenance to maintain the algorithm
      Complex projects                 Refers to projects with a high rate of complexity and demand
      Theft/leakage of information     Refers to unauthorized access to data
      Poor team management             Refers to scenarios that includes, high member volatility and the lack of adequate project
                                       specialists (scientists with limited business knowledge)
      Poor management of               It refers to cases in which the client is not made aware of the limitations of the work to be
      customer expectations            developed. By carelessness or lack of experience of the manager/leader
      Instability/degradation of the   Refers to scenarios where models are made available without having a solid stability or
      model or software (algorithm     scenarios where the models stop working well after some time
      failure)
      Cyber attacks                    It relates to unauthorized access under a computer system, with the aim of altering, disabling,
                                       destroying or stealing information
      Lack of knowledge of data        Refers to scenarios where there is little knowledge about best practices for segmenting the data
      segmentation laws                in use
      Unavailability of the            It relates to the scenario where face-to-face contact with the client to discuss important points
      customer to meet                 of the project becomes very scarce


    Although this study is not yet complete, the result obtained in this second round shows that there are many risk
situations in the project scope management, which in general end up influencing the appearance of other risks. 64%
of the experts consider "poorly defined project scope" as frequent to very frequent, influencing delays, additional costs
and the overall result. The project scope defines all the paths and resources needed to achieve project success, and if
it is not critically and clearly defined, the probability of project failure is very high. Some experts have pointed out
that this risk is very serious because it tends to trigger many negative events in the course of the developments and
have a direct impact on the success of the project and the customer's actual business needs. Even if the project is
delivered, it could not be useful to the customer. "Communication problems" was rated as frequent to very frequent
89% of the time and has been pointed out as a risk that impacts cost, time and scope, the fundamental pillars of a
project [13]. As for the “lack of documents”, considered frequent 46% of the time, is considered a trigger to delays.
Still, in project management, other risks identified as frequently to very frequent, are the ones related to “poor time
estimation” (73%) and “poor management of customer expectations” (55%), but not always considered to have a high
impact. Some experts consider that it depends a lot on the type of project, the client and the project scope. Other quality
and performance risks as “lack data labelling - faulty data”, “focus only on model performance instead of usability”
were also pointed as frequent 64% and 73% of the time, respectively. The lack of data quality assessed was pointed to
be a frequent problem, since it can change the defined scope, delay the project and contribute to wrong decision
making. Risks, such as “data security negligence” were also mentioned 64% of the time, as frequent. Some of the
988                                          Cristina Varela et al. / Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989
                                  Cristina Varela, Luísa Domingues/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000                                 7

experts reported that in many projects they participated in, the issue of security at all levels is not yet practiced. Small
actions that could create openings for information leaks that could compromise the organization or the customer are
quite frequent.
    Although it is not yet possible to present conclusive statistical data as of this study, it can be seen that there is some
consensus about the frequency of the 25 risks presented in table 2. And it can be seen that the type of Data Science
project contributed to the severity/impact level not always being the same, but in general, the risk impacts the same
business areas (time and cost), regardless of its severity. Only a first analysis of the results of this study has been
presented here. The additional results from the third round will be the information needed to conclude this study using
Delphi techniques.

4. Conclusion

   For this study, the use of the Delphi technique was very valuable. It was possible to gather information, analyze it
to be later discussed with experts to create a consensus among all risks identified. It represented a major contribution
to find the leading risks that could influence the success or failure of a project. So far, this study has provided an
understanding of the most critical risk issues among projects of Data Science in Portugal. In addition to the rounds of
the study already completed, a final round will be conducted, with the goal of obtaining a conclusive classification of
the 25 most frequent risks identified. In this last round, it is also expected to have more direct contact with experts,
who in addition to classifying the risks, may also share experiences about Data Science projects in Portugal. The risks,
the biggest challenges, success, and failure rates of the projects, and the factors that led to such closure. For that, the
third round will be conducted throughout meeting/interview sessions with the experts. This last round of the study will
allow the experts to reflect on the collective opinion regarding what each risk represents in the Data Science field and
also raise awareness about these issues. Consequently, we consider the Delphi technique to be a very powerful research
tool. We believe that this study was a very valuable starting point for addressing the risks in Data Science projects in
Portugal and that there is still much more research and information to be gathered about the success of Data Science
projects and how organizations can design projects targeting the risks identified in this study in order to achieve better
results.

Acknowledgements

  We thank all the experts, who kindly accepted the invitation to be part of this study. A special thank also goes to
ISCTE -IUL, for the research funding supported by the FCT UIDB/04466/2020 project.

References

[1] C. Taurion, Big Data, Rio de Janeiro: Brasport Livros e Multimídia Ltda, 2013.
[2] E. Robinson e J. Nolis, Build a Career in Data Science, New York: Manning Publictions Co, 2020.
[3] J. Walker, “Digital Journal - Big data strategies disappoint with 85 percent failure rate,” 23 November 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://www.digitaljournal.com/tech-and-science/technology/big-data-strategies-disappoint-with-85-percent-failurerate/
article/508325#ixzz5JvGk3AV0. [Accessed on December 10th, 2020].
[4] M. Asay, “3 ways to massively fail with machine learning (and one key to success),” 12 July 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/3-ways-to-massively-fail-with-machine-learning-and-one-key-to-success/.[Accessed on October 23rd, 2020].
[5] B. Taylor, “Why Most AI Projects Fail,” 16 October 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.datarobot.com/blog/why-most-ai-projects-fail./.
[Accessed on October 23rd, 2020].
[6] K. Veeramachaneni, “Why You’re Not Getting Value from Your Data Science,” 7 December 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://hbr.org/2016/12/why-youre-not-getting-value-from-your-data-science. [Accessed on October 24th, 2020].
[7] H. Barki, S. Rivard e J. Talbo, “Toward an Assessment of Software Development Risk,” Journal of Management Information System, pp.
203-225, 1993.
[8] J. D. Kelleher e B. Tierney, Data science, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2018.
[9] K. Manheim e L. Kaplan, “Artificial Intelligence: Risks to Privacy and Democracy,” 21 Yale J.L. & Tech., vol. 21, 2019.
[10] K. Schwalbe, Information Technology Project Management, Eighth Edition, Boston: Cengage Learning, 2016.
                                            Cristina Varela et al. / Procedia Computer Science 196 (2022) 982–989                            989
8                               Cristina Varela, Luísa Domingues/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000

[11] E. Raguseo, “Big data technologies: An empirical investigation on their adoption, benefits and risks for companies,” International Journal of
Information Management, pp. 187-195, 2018.
[12] S. Ozdemir, Principles of data science, Birmingham - Mumbai: Packt Publishing, 2016.
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 11
[13] PMI, A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide) Sixth Edition, Pensilvânia: Project Management Institute,
Inc., 2017.
[14] R. d. Graaf, Managing Your Data Science Projects: Learn Salesmanship, Presentation, and Maintenance of Completed Models 1st ed.
Edition, Australia: Apress, 2019.
[15] D. K. Jadhav, “Big Data: The New Challenges in Data Mining,” International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer Science &
Technology, pp. 2347-5552, 2013.
[16] B. Gärtner e M. R. Hiebl, “Issues with Big Data,” The Routledge Companion to Accounting Information Systems, 2018.
[17] N. A. Hasan, A. A. Rahman e N. A. Lahad, “ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE CASE STUDIES,” Jurnal
Teknologi, pp. 171-178, 2015.
[18] B. Cheatham, K. Javanmardian e H. Samandari, “Confronting the risks of artificial intelligence,” McKinsey Quarterly,, pp. 1-9, 2019.
[19] H. R. Tizhoosh e L. Pantanowitz, “Artificial intelligence and digital pathology: Challenges and opportunities,” Journal of pathology
Informatics, pp. 1-6, 2018.
[20]D. H. Freedman, “A Reality Check for IBM’s AI Ambitions,” 27 June 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.technologyreview.com/2017/06/27/4462/a-reality-check-for-ibms-ai-ambitions/.
[21] J. Osborne, S. Collins, M. Ratcliffe, R. Millar e R. Duschl, “What “Ideas-about-Science” should be taught in school science? A Delphi study
of the expert community,” Journal of Research in science teaching, pp. 692-720, 2002.
[22] R. Schmidt, K. Lyytinen, M. Keil e P. Cule, “Identifying Software Project Risks An International Delphi Study,” Journal of Management
Information System, pp. 5-36, 2001.
[23] V. Kasi, M. Keil, L. Mathiassen e K. Pedersen, “The post mortem paradox: a Delphi study of IT specialist perceptions,” European Journal of
Information Systems, pp. 67-78, 2008.
[24] S. D. Haes e W. V. Grembergen, “An exploratory study into IT governance implementations and its impact on business/IT alignment,”
Information Systems Management, pp. 123-137, 2009.
[25] C. Okoli e S. D. Pawlowski, “The Delphi method as a research tool: an example, design considerations and applications,” Information &
Management, pp. 15-29, 2004.
[26] K. W. Brooks, “Delphi techniques: Expanding applications,” North Central Association Quarterly, 1979.
[27] L. Frei, “Why The Data Science Venn Diagram Is Misleading,” Towards data science, 27 March 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://towardsdatascience.com/why-the-data-science-venn-diagram-is-misleading-16751f852063. [Accessed on October 18th, 2020].
